AP United States 
History 
Free-Response Questions
 

© 2017 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo 
are registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 

AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. 

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

UNITED STATES HISTORY
 

SECTION I, Part B
 

Time—50 minutes
 

4 Questions
 

Directions: Write your responses in the Section I, Part B: Short-Answer Response booklet. You must write your 
response to each question on the lined page designated for that response. Each response is expected to fit within its 
designated page. 

Answer all parts of every question. Use complete sentences; an outline or bulleted list alone is not acceptable. You 
may plan your answers in this exam booklet, but no credit will be given for notes written in this booklet. 

1. Answer (a), (b), and (c).

a) Briefly explain how ONE specific historical development represents an accomplishment of the national

government under the Articles of Confederation.

b) Briefly explain ONE specific argument critics used in the 1780s to support revising the Articles of

Confederation.

c) Briefly explain ONE specific way in which the United States Constitution addresses a criticism of the Articles

of Confederation.

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
 
 

-2-


2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

2. Answer (a), (b), and (c).

a)	  Briefly explain ONE important way in which the Second World War (1939–1945) transformed the relationship

of the United States with the rest of the world.

b)	  Briefly explain ONE important way in which the Second World War transformed United States society.
c)	  Briefly explain ANOTHER important way in which the Second World War transformed United States society.

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 

 

 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
 
 

-3-


2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Use the images to answer all parts of the question that follows.
 

Courtesy of the Library of Congress 

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE.
 
 

-4-


2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Courtesy of the Library of Congress 

3. Using the two images, both by artist James Wales, answer (a), (b), and (c).

a) Briefly explain ONE historical perspective expressed by the artist about the changes from the period

1869–1877 to the period 1877–1881.

b) Briefly explain how ONE specific event or development led to a historical change suggested by the images.
c) Briefly explain ONE specific result in the period 1877–1900 of a historical change suggested by the images.

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-5-

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

 

 conviction prompted policymakers to escalate the war. . . . 

 

 ‘loss’ to communism in East Asia risked renewed and devastating attacks from the 

“An arrogant and stubborn faith in America’s power to shape the course of foreign events compounded the 
dangers sown by ideological rigidity. Policymakers . . . shared a common . . . conviction that the United 
States not only should, but could, control political conditions in South Vietnam, as elsewhere throughout 
much of the world. This conviction had led Washington to intervene progressively deeper in South 
Vietnamese affairs over the years. . . . This
Domestic political pressures exerted an equally powerful . . . influence over the course of U.S. involvement in 
Vietnam. . . . Another
right.” 

Brian VanDeMark, historian, Into the Quagmire, 1995 

“The escalation of U.S. military intervention [in Vietnam] grew out of a complicated chain of events and a 
complex web of decisions that slowly transformed the conflict . . . into an American war. . . . [President 
Lyndon Johnson] made the critical decisions that took the United States into war almost without realizing it. 
. . . Although impersonal forces . . . influenced the president’s Vietnam decisions, those decisions depended 
primarily on his character, his motivations, and his relationships with his principal advisers. . . . T  he war in 
Vietnam was not lost in the field, nor was it lost on the front pages of The New York Times or on the college 
campuses. It was lost in Washington, D.C., even before Americans assumed sole responsibility for the 
fighting.” 

H. R. McMaster, historian, Dereliction of Duty, 1997 

4. Using the excerpts, answer (a), (b), and (c).

a)	  Briefly explain ONE major difference between VanDeMark’s and McMaster’s historical interpretations of the

United States involvement in the Vietnam War.

b)	  Briefly explain how ONE historical event or development in the period 1945 to 1975 that is not explicitly

mentioned in the excerpts could be used to support VanDeMark’s interpretation.

c)	  Briefly explain how ONE historical event or development in the period 1945 to 1975 that is not explicitly

mentioned in the excerpts could be used to support McMaster’s interpretation.

END OF SECTION I
 

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-6-

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

UNITED STATES HISTORY SECTION II
 

Total Time—1 hour, 30 minutes
 

Question 1 (Document-Based Question)
 

Suggested reading and writing time: 55 minutes
 

It is suggested that you spend 15 minutes reading the documents and 40 minutes writing your response.
 
Note: You may begin writing your response before the reading period is over.
 

Directions: Question 1 is based on the accompanying documents. The documents have been edited for the purpose 
of this exercise. 

In your response you should do the following. 
•	  Thesis: Present a thesis that makes a historically defensible claim and responds to all parts of the question. The
thesis must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the conclusion.
•	  Argument Development: Develop and support a cohesive argument that recognizes and accounts for historical

complexity by explicitly illustrating relationships among historical evidence such as contradiction,
 
corroboration, and/or qualification.
 

•	  Use of the Documents: Utilize the content of at least six of the documents to support the stated thesis or a

relevant argument. 

•	  Sourcing the Documents: Explain the significance of the author’s point of view, author’s purpose, historical

context, and/or audience for at least four documents.

•	  Contextualization: Situate the argument by explaining the broader historical events, developments, or processes

immediately relevant to the question.

•	  Outside Evidence: Provide an example or additional piece of specific evidence beyond those found in the

documents to support or qualify the argument.

•	  Synthesis: Extend the argument by explaining the connections between the argument and ONE of the following.
o	  A development in a different historical period, situation, era, or geographical area.
o	  A course theme and/or approach to history that is not the focus of the essay (such as political,

economic, social, cultural, or intellectual history).

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-7-

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

1. Evaluate the extent of change in ideas about American independence from 1763 to 1783.

Document 1 

Source: Teapot, made in England between 1766 and 1770, inscribed on one side with “No Stamp Act” and on 
the other with “America, Liberty Restored.” 

Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of American History, Home and Community Life 

© 2017 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 

 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-8­

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 2 

Source: The Virginia House of Burgesses, The Virginia Resolves, 1769. 

It is the Opinion of this Committee, that the sole Right of imposing Taxes on the Inhabitants of this his 
Majesty’s Colony and Dominion of Virginia, is now, and ever hath been, legally and constitutionally vested in 
the House of Burgesses, lawfully convened according to the ancient and established Practice, with the 
Consent of the Council, and of his Majesty, the King of Great-Britain, or his Governor, for the Time being. 

It is the Opinion of this Committee, that it is the undoubted Privilege of the Inhabitants of this Colony, to 
petition their Sovereign for Redress of Grievances; and that it is lawful and expedient to procure the 
Concurrence of his Majesty’s other Colonies, in dutiful Addresses, praying the royal Interposition in Favour 
of the Violated Rights of America. . . . 

It is the Opinion of this Committee, that an humble, dutiful, and loyal Address, be presented to his Majesty, 
to assure him of our inviolable Attachment to his sacred Person and Government; and to beseech his royal 
Interposition, as the Father of all his people, however remote from the Seat of his Empire, to quiet the Minds 
of his loyal Subjects of this Colony, and to avert from them, those Dangers and Miseries which will ensue, 
from the seizing and carrying beyond Sea, any Person residing in America, suspected of any Crime 
whatsoever, to be tried in any other Manner, than by the ancient and long established Course of Proceeding. 

Document 3 

Source: Samuel Adams, The Rights of the Colonists, 1772. 

All men have a right to remain in a state of nature as long as they please; and in case of intolerable 
oppression, civil or religious, to leave the society they belong to, and enter into another. When men enter into 
society, it is by voluntary consent; and they have a right to demand and insist upon the performance of such 
conditions and previous limitations as form an equitable original compact. . . . 

The natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will or 
legislative authority of man, but only to have the law of nature for his rule. 

© 2017 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 

 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-9­

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 4 

Source: Quaker leaders, address to the Pennsylvania colonial assembly, January 1775. 

Having considered, with real sorrow, the unhappy contest between the legislature of Great Britain and the 
people of these colonies, and the animosities consequent therein, we have by repeated public advices and 
private admonitions, used our endeavors to dissuade the members of our religious society from joining with 
the public resolutions promoted and entered into by some of the people, which as we apprehended, and so we 
now find, have increased contention, and produced great discord and confusion. . . . 

We are therefore incited by a sincere concern for the peace and welfare of our country, publicly to declare 
against every usurpation of power and authority in opposition to the laws and government, and against all 
combinations, insurrections, conspiracies, and illegal assemblies; and as we are restrained from them by the 
conscientious discharge of our duty to Almighty God, “by whom kings reign and princes decree justice,” we 
hope . . . to maintain . . . the fidelity we owe to the King and his government, as by law established; earnestly 
desiring the restoration of that harmony and concord which have heretofore united the people of these 
provinces. 

Document 5 

Source: Janet Schaw, Journal of a Lady of Quality, June 1775. Schaw was a Scot visiting her brother, a 
merchant, in Wilmington, North Carolina. 

At present the martial law stands thus: An officer or committeeman enters a plantation with his posse. The 
alternative is proposed. Agree to join us [the Patriots] and your persons and properties are safe . . . if you 
refuse, we are directly to cut up your corn, shoot your pigs, burn your houses, seize your Negroes and 
perhaps tar and feather yourself. Not to choose the first requires more courage than they are possessed of, and 
I believe this method has seldom failed with the lower sort. 

© 2017 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 

 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-10­

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 6 

Source: Charles Inglis, Anglican church minister in New York City, The Costs of Revolution, 1776. 

Where the money is to come from which will defray this enormous annual expense of three millions sterling 
[for the American Revolution], and all those other debts, I know not. . . . Certain I am that our commerce and 
agriculture, the two principal sources of our wealth, will not support such an expense. The whole of our 
exports from the Thirteen United Colonies, in the year 1769, amounted only to £2,887,898 sterling; which is 
not so much, by near half a million, as our annual expense would be were we independent of Great Britain. 
Those exports, with no inconsiderable part of the profits arising from them, it is well known, centered finally 
in Britain to pay the merchants and manufacturers there for goods we had imported thence—and yet left us 
still in debt! What then must our situation be, or what the state of our trade, when oppressed with such a 
burden of annual expense! When every article of commerce, every necessary of life, together with our lands, 
must be heavily taxed to defray that expense! 

Document 7 

Source: Thomas Paine, The American Crisis, December 23, 1776. 

These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, 
shrink from the service of their country; but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and 
woman. Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the 
conflict, the more glorious the triumph. What we obtain too cheap, we esteem too lightly: it is dearness only 
that gives every thing its value. Heaven knows how to put a proper price upon its goods; and it would be 
strange indeed if so celestial an article as freedom should not be highly rated. Britain, with an army to 
enforce her tyranny, has declared that she has a right (not only to tax) but “to bind us in all cases whatsoever.” 

END OF DOCUMENTS FOR QUESTION 1
 

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


 

 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
 

-11­

2017 AP® UNITED STATES HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Question 2 or Question 3
 

Suggested writing time: 35 minutes
  

Directions: Choose EITHER Question 2 or Question 3. 

In your response you should do the following. 
•	  Thesis: Present a thesis that makes a historically defensible claim and responds to all parts of the question. The
thesis must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the conclusion.
•	  Application of Historical Thinking Skills: Develop and support an argument that applies historical thinking

skills as directed by the question. 

•	  Supporting the Argument with Evidence: Utilize specific examples of evidence to fully and effectively

substantiate the stated thesis or a relevant argument.

•	  Synthesis: Extend the argument by explaining the connections between the argument and one of the following.
o	  A development in a different historical period, situation, era, or geographical area.
o	  A course theme and/or approach to history that is not the focus of the essay (such as political,

economic, social, cultural, or intellectual history).

2. Evaluate the extent to which the market revolution marked a turning point in women’s lives in the United
 

States.
 

In the development of your argument, explain what changed and what stayed the same for women as a result of
the market revolution within the period 1800–1850. (Historical thinking skill: Periodization)

3. Evaluate the extent to which the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which
 

guaranteed women the right to vote, marked a turning point in United States women’s history.
 

In the development of your argument, explain what changed and what stayed the same from the period
immediately before the ratification of the amendment (1865–1920) to the period immediately after
(1920–1940). (Historical thinking skill: Periodization)

WHEN YOU FINISH WRITING, CHECK YOUR WORK ON SECTION II IF TIME PERMITS. 

STOP 

END OF EXAM 

© 2017 The College Board. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


-12­